if you care about mental health care
about your weight and your energy levels
you have to care about them
because if it's not healthy you're not
healthy Dr will Cole best-selling author
one of the top 50 functional medicine
practitioners and is a health expert for
the world's largest Wellness brand such
as goop there's so much medical
gaslighting going on the average
conventional doctor would fail a basic
nutrition test and I find that to be
problematic because you have the worst
Healthcare System to get your
criticizing people that are trying to do
something different
you define yourself as a functional
medicine doctor the differences between
mainstream medicine and functional
medicine is they are trained to diagnose
a disease and match up with the
medication but I think the nutrition
forward approach to Health Care is
vastly important why because the vast
majority of health problems are
lifestyle driven Foods we eat exposure
to toxins these lifestyle things are
really what's plaguing our society 60 to
80 percent of all Western countries are
dealing with some massive metabolic
issues
in part fed by chronic stress part of
our trauma in our life has to do with
the trauma that our ancestors have gone
through it's sound science fiction but
looking at how trauma is literally
stored in the cells and then passed
through Family Lines is very much
science are you optimistic that there's
things we can do to change it as trauma
can be inherited so can healing there's
three main things first thing is number
two the third would be
before we get into this episode just
wanted to say thank you first and
foremost for being part of this
community
um the team here at the diversio is now
almost 30 people and that's literally
because you watch and you subscribe and
you um leave comments and you like the
videos that this show has been able to
grow and it's the greatest honor of my
life to sit here with these incredible
people and just selfishly ask them
questions that I'm pondering over or
worrying about in my life but this is
just the beginning for the day of this
year we've got big big plans to scale
this show and to every corner of the
world and to to diversify Our Guest
selection and that's enabled by you by
simple thing that you guys do which is
to watch so if there's one thing you
could do to help this show and to help
us continue to do what we do it's just
to hit the Subscribe button if you like
this show if you like what we do here if
you watch these episodes please just hit
that subscribe button means the world
let's get on with it
[Music]
Dr will my friend thanks for having me
I'm going to start this um conversation
where I started it quite recently when I
spoke to
Max who I think you you're familiar with
um which is
what you do
and why do you do it hmm
I've always been a health nerd I guess
you could call it and in hindsight I I
now look back and think of how what a
weird kid I was my first job was at the
finish line but I don't know if you have
those in the UK but the basically tennis
shoes like sneaker stores and I you I'd
use my paycheck at 16 years old to go to
the health food store and buy the latest
superfood that I'd see research on the
latest supplement and that was always
fascinating to me how could you optimize
your health using natural things using
things that are of the planet and food
to feel great and needless to say my I
was packing my lunch in this in the
brown bags with the peppers and
bananas and these whole grains the
crunchy things in the in the 90s and my
friends weren't doing that so that
evolved in me being interested in that
food and nutrition to want to be be
formally trained and I have a family
history of autoimmune conditions and I
just have a passion to figure out these
complex puzzles and it's a sacred
responsibility for me to then take my
own passion and how can I problem solve
for these people and hold space for them
because I see
in the topic of autoimmunity
specifically it's a vast in many ways a
silent epidemic of people that are
struggling there's so much medical
gaslighting going on they're told
they're just depressed given
antidepressants they're told they are
just stressed out but the research
speaks for itself these statistics speak
for itself that we have in the United
States alone about 50 million Americans
having an autoimmune condition but
Millions more are somewhere on this
autoimmune inflammation Spectrum where
they're they're labeled with things like
chronic fatigue syndrome and
fibromyalgia and they they may not even
be diagnosable but they're they're
feeling that sort of anxiety and fatigue
and brain fog and digestive problems and
different iterations of inflammation so
it's if you know anything I guess to
answer your question pointedly my
Enneagram if you know anything about
that sort of Personality study I'm an
Enneagram five which means I'm a
researcher so I'm sort of this voracious
like let's figure this out and get to
the root cause of why you're struggling
so that's why I do what I do and you
define yourself in terms of your job
title as a functional medicine doctor
yes I'm a functional medicine doctor
what does that mean so if I had to break
it down the differences between
conventional medicine and functional
medicine mainstream medicine and
functional medicine first thing is we
interpret Labs using a thinner reference
range if you know you get your lab and
you have your number and you have this x
to Y interval this reference range that
your GP or PCP is comparing you to we
get that reference range largely from a
statistical bell curve average of people
who go to that lab it's non-standardized
for the most part people that are
predominantly going to Labs or people
sadly going through health problems so a
lot of people know intuitively
something's off here my fatigue my brain
fog my digestive issue my hair loss
whatever it is they go to the doctor and
the doctor runs the basic labs and they
say look the labs pretty much look
normal you're just depressed you're just
you're stressed out what the
unintentionally telling the patient is
they're a lot like the other people with
health problems that they're being
compared to
just because something's common doesn't
necessarily mean it's normal comparing
yourself to people with health problems
is no way for you to find out how you
can feel at your best and why you feel
the way that you do so in functional
medicine we're looking at optimal not
average so the Cleveland Clinic here in
the United States has a functional
medicine center main many mainstream
institutions have functional medicine
and Integrative Medicine Institutions
and all of us in functional medicine are
trained through what's called The
Institute for functional medicine so
we're looking at optimo now average
we're running more comprehensive labs to
get to the root cause because ultimately
speaking we're none of us are sick from
a pharmaceutical deficiency you know
we're gonna like pharmaceutical your way
into Health one day they're disease
managing medications and are needed many
times but ultimately we ask the question
what is your most effective option that
causes you the least amount of side
effects and for some people medications
fit that criteria and they need to be on
it but oftentimes medications really
they don't fit that criteria yet it's
the only option given to them and
there's a root Upstream causation as to
why they have to be on that disease
modifying medication in the first place
so we're looking at things like
underlying gut problems chronic
infections nutrient deficiencies
hormonal imbalances or things like
trauma and shame the things that I'm
talking about my latest book and
ultimately it's predicated on bio
individuality we're all different and
even good things even healthy things
that's relevant that's pertinent for one
person may not be relevant for you and
even healthy foods what works for one
person may not work for you so it's
really
curated customized evidence-based
medicine in short if you know when you
think about conventional medicine and
conventional I guess Health advice and
then you contrast that to your
perspective your view of health and
Medicine what are the real stock
differences
well I think
the the diagnostic aspect is that is one
of them because they're trained in the
standard model of care to diagnose a
disease and match it with the medication
so that sort of sort of medicinal
matching game if you will is a major
part of the conventional model of care
and I think a nutrition forward approach
to Health Care is another one and I
mentioned a study and gut feelings how
the this it was it's
study in a medical journal and showed
that in this one group that the average
conventional doctor would fail a basic
nutrition test because of the training
that's not there and any conventional
doctor will tell you and actually most
of my colleagues in functional medicine
are conventionally trained and they will
tell you they have to go to post
doctorate training to even learn about
nutrition and I find that to be
problematic because we're dealing with
the vast majority of health problems
that people are seeing are lifestyle
driven meaning that the foods we eat or
not eating our stress levels our sleep
our exposure to toxins these epigenetic
lifestyle things are really what's
fueling what is plaguing our society and
what the major like endocrinologist PCP
GP are seeing on their day-to-day visits
so I would say the approach is different
because there's a place for medication
again I mentioned that sort of litmus
test of maybe a piece to your puzzle But
ultimately it is not the totality of
what's going on here and we have to look
at it in my opinion a both and not an
either or sort of reductive tribal
approach and that's where I think
functional medicine attempts to bring
things together where it's not US versus
them it's well what is the most
effective tools within this person's
toolbox the medications may be part of
it but there are oftentimes a lot more
effective a lot less side effects
tools within than that tool block within
that toolbox you mentioned earlier that
you you had family members that had
autoimmune inflammation conditions yeah
what was that and how did that have an
impact on you at all well I mean I could
go over both sides of my family really
there's there's different neurological
autoimmune issues like Ms type symptoms
if you know anything about that
type 1 diabetes on both sides of the
family with the immune system attacks
the pancreas and then the body cannot
produce insulins you have to take
insulin to manage your blood sugar
people have autoimmune thyroid issues
Hashimoto's diseases really are one of
our top patient based today is people
that have autoimmune thyroid issues and
different and other inflammatory
problems so how it impacted me I think
was just seeing
how it impacted the quality of life and
health and life on Earth I think in many
ways is just so fragile I mean it's we
take things for granted so much until
it's not there and I'm reminded on an
hourly basis from with my patients now
too it's just a sacred thing that I want
to do everything I can to help them
regain it
gut feelings book you've just
finished writing I believe
um
why did you write a book called gut
feelings what was that you know I always
say this when I speak to authors that
writing a book is an absolute labor of
love I mean takes forever to do it's a
painful process yeah so so to do that
you must really have
found a topic subject matter that really
really mattered to you why gut feelings
why did you call it that why did you
write that book
it's like any this is my fourth book and
as with anything that I've written it's
really born out of my passion for my
patients and just seeing things play out
and I think in many ways my patients are
kind of like
you know that's saying canaries in the
coal mine I think they're canaries in
the coal mine for the rest of the world
because they tend to be you know further
down that autoimmune inflammation
Spectrum they're struggling with
different inflammatory problems but then
I look at the statistics and I realize
it's just they're the tip of the iceberg
of really what's going on
um so gut feelings is really a
conversation
around
mental health and autoimmunity and
people's I would say diet culture as a
whole and talking about the sort of
Duality within Wellness both gut and
feelings the physiological and the
psychological the physical and the
mental emotional spiritual and again
this both and approach that I think is
needed to have sustainable healing in
people's lives whether they're going
through anxiety and depression brain fog
or fatigue or they're going through an
autoimmune condition or a different
inflammatory problem you have to deal
with both this both physical and mental
emotional spiritual
and I I love the fact that I think in
our culture in the past years we've made
great strides to normalize mental health
care and destigmatize people getting
access to Mental Health Care wonderful I
just feel like it's in many ways
this is sort of the next stage in that
conversation because I think in many
ways it's an incomplete conversation
around mental health care because in the
west we still like to separate mental
health from physical health you know
it's a mental health problem we sort of
relegate it as sort of this abstract
sort of philosophical chemical imbalance
if you will which is in now it's coming
up it's flimsy science at best anyways
that we have to realize that mental
health is physical health and our brain
is a part of our body just like anything
else so it's really in in a part gut
feelings it's a conversation around
what's known in the research as the the
cytokine model of cognitive function
cytokines are pro-inflammatory cells
right so it's research looking at how
does inflammation impact how my brain
works how does inflammation impact
mental health so things like anxiety
depression brain fog fatigue have this
inflammatory component but then the
question is what I really talk about in
the book is what's driving the
inflammation because inflammation is a
normal part of the immune system but
what's triggering this chronic
inflammation that's sort of this this
forest fire that's burning in perpetuity
that's the problem of what's triggering
people's mental health issues just like
it's triggering their autoimmune issues
so both the gut and the feelings part of
it are the things that we know from the
research and I have a lot of clinical
experience to show how these things
impact People's Health so the gut things
I eat like underlying gut problems 75 of
the immune system inflammation is a
product of the immune system our gut and
brain are actually formed from the same
fetal tissue so when babies are growing
in their mother's womb the gut and brain
are formed from that same fetal tissue
and they're inextricably linked for the
rest of our life through what's known as
the gut brain access or the connection
between the gut and the brain and if you
think about it the intestines kind of
even resemble the brain 95 of Serotonin
is made in the gut fifty percent of
dopamine is made in the gut stored in
the gut researchers call it the second
brain for a reason because of this
this is a lot of far-reaching
implications to underlying gut problems
to not only inflammatory problems I.E
autoimmune issues but also to mental
health issues because it is the second
brain but then conversely the feeling
stuff like I really talk about in the
book The research around chronic stress
and Trauma and even intergenerational
trauma how these big complex things
these mental emotional spiritual things
are literally stored in ourselves just
regulating our nervous system raising
inflammation levels impacting how our
hormones are expressed so it's both a
gut and a feeling side of two sides of
the same coin that impact so many people
and I don't you know I just I had these
conversations with my patients all the
time it just was a matter of when I had
the conversation in book form
inflammation
I don't really know what that word means
how would you summarize or um simplify
that word for anybody that also doesn't
really understand the term inflammation
yeah it is abstract I think to your
point it's I use it so flippantly that I
realize I'm in this weird Health bubble
but it is a nebulous term it's not
inherently bad it's a product of the
immune system the immune system makes
different proteins different amino acids
different chemical Messengers if you
will that fights viruses
fights bacteria heals wounds so when you
think of inflammation in this sort of
normal acute State it's if somebody it's
a sporting injury and their knee swells
up right that's acute inflammation
rushing nutrients and healing and oxygen
and white blood cells to the area to
repair it to rejuvenate it that's normal
measured human inflammation we would be
goners as a species without normal in a
normal inflammatory response
it's when inflammation goes chronic
that there's a problem
chronic inflammation
It's associated with just about every
health problem under the sun when you're
looking at what researchers are looking
at these inflammatory components you're
looking at autoimmune issues metabolic
issues like type 2 diabetes when you
look at uh cancer heart disease to
mental health issues as I mentioned this
sort of cytokine looking at the
neuroinflammatory component to things
like anxiety and depression so that's
what inflammation is when it when it
goes chronic it really sets off a lot of
cascade of dysregulation in the body
because it's it's a lack of homeostasis
it's the Goldilocks principle you know
it's not too high not too low but just
right that's where you want inflammation
just like many things in the body just
like the gut bacteria in our microbiome
you don't want bacterial overgrowth we
don't want a deficit of beneficial
bacteria like hormones we don't want too
much hormones like a dominance of
hormones we don't want a deficiency of
hormones either inflammation is the same
thing we don't want excess inflammation
that's what's associated with all of
these chronic health problems and we
don't want a deficiency that's
immunosuppressed people that people have
immunodeficiencies that's not good
either so it's about modulating and
supporting healthy inflammatory Pathways
is really the clinical objective for my
patients and for the average person out
there that's looking to optimize how
they want to feel that should be their
goal as well
so I've got two questions that what is a
symptom that one might notice in
themselves of chronic inflammation and
what are in your practice what are the
leading sort of causes of that chronic
inflammation sure so there's three the
way that we see it in functional
medicine there's three main stages if
you will on this Continuum this
inflammation Spectrum on one end the
silent inflammation silent autoimmunity
meaning if you ran Labs you'd see some
some markers off like a high sensitivity
C-reactive protein which is a quite a
conventional marker you'd see that
spiked you see maybe a homocysteine
level elevated another inflammatory
protein but the person feels all right
they say everything's cool
stage two is the inflammation reactivity
that's the vast majority of people
living on our planet today are in stage
two or three stage two a lot of people
are there they have things like brain
fog they have things like fatigue
they have some sort of dysregulated
nervous system response a way that
people typically will say it they'll say
I'm anxious but I'm exhausted or wired
and tired is the other way of putting it
they have different digestive problems I
mean the amount of people that have
chronic constipation or IBS or some sort
of digestive issue that again it's
they're every day so they normalize it
but these things are anything but normal
they're just ubiquitous
and I would put under that category
mental health issues like anxiety
depression autoimmune reactivity issues
and people that have hormonal problems
and then stage three is a full-blown
diagnosable issue like they're going to
their doctor and they're given an ICD-10
code in the States they're given some
diagnostic code and they're given a
medication or recommended some
conventional treatment but researchers
estimate
it's about four to ten years prior to
that diagnosis when things were Brewing
on the Spectrum meaning by the time
somebody gets diagnosed officially it
didn't happen overnight for most people
so it's no matter where you're at how
can you be supporting your gut and your
feelings how can you be supporting your
physical health and your mental
emotional spiritual health so Nancy the
second part of your question is like
what are the most common causes of it
it really stems like the broad umbrella
of it has to do with what researchers
refer to as an evolutionary mismatch or
an epigenetic genetic mismatch our
genetics that's estimated hasn't changed
haven't changed in about ten thousand
years
but yet our world has changed
dramatically and it really finite period
of time when you're putting that into
context with the totality of human
history so the foods we're eating or the
foods we're not eating our stress levels
our Collective and personal traumas
environmental toxins our soil microbiome
disruption and depletion
and in turn impacting our gut microbiome
so all of these epigenetic modulators if
you will are DNA is living in this Brave
New World and it's Awakening genetic
predispositions that have been lying
dormant there for 10 000 years but
they're being triggered like never
before in human history because of this
onslaught of this Chasm between our DNA
and the world around us
so on that point then the world the
world we live in is
um may be misaligned to our genetics
which is kind of what I heard there
let's start with the the emotional stuff
one of the topics you introduce in
chapter one of your book is this idea of
Shame inflation I've never had that term
before yeah same formation shame okay
shame inflammation
um what does that mean and what's what
science have you got to support that
that's a real thing yeah well it's it's
really a commentary on inflammation it's
not that shame formation's a literal
real thing it's a commentary on how does
what's shown in the research as far as
in things like chronic stress which is
so well researched and Trauma and I talk
about in the book something called
intergenerational or transgenerational
trauma how do these things impact our
body our physical health so shame is
sort of a term that a lot of my patients
feel varying degrees of Shame they feel
shame that they're not perfect enough
with their body or around food or around
life itself not you know being the best
parent or the best whatever in their
life there's a lot of health related
shame in our world and just shame in
general when it comes to life so shame
is sort of the term that I used in the
book of how to explain the sort of
mental emotional spiritual feeling that
people have how does impacting their
health in the book I talk about this
study around self-compassion
and which is really right the antithesis
of someone that's shaming themselves is
someone that has sort of Grace and a
lightness and a self-compassion around
it and study the study had people do
they had them speak in public or do math
which apparently that's what we hate the
most is humans but that they measured
their inflammation levels when they were
doing these stressful things right and
their inflammation levels were high
interleukin-6 it's il-6 inflammatory
protein but the people that practice
self-compassion during this time had the
lowest levels of inflammation and on day
two you'd expect okay the person would
sort of adapt and the people that were
doing the math or the public speaking
maybe the inflammation would come down
actually the inflammation levels were
higher on day two than day one sort of
this cumulative effect but again the
people with that practice
self-compassion which I talked about the
different practices in the book that
I've seen effective for my patients it
attenuates calms that inflammatory
response and that's just one of money
but we well most health problems of why
people are visiting their doctor are
stress related that are either
exacerbated by stress that are flared up
by stress or literally caused by stress
when you're looking up at things like
autoimmune issues we have patients fill
out
what's called an adverse childhood
experience score every Telehealth
patient that we have and research has
shown that people have these higher Ace
scores these cumulative childhood and
Beyond childhood lifestyle like life
stressors whether physical abuse sexual
abuse mental emotional abuse alcohol
abuse in the home growing up people that
have gone through these things in life
have an increased likelihood of an
autoimmune issue later on in Life or a
mental health issue later on life or a
metabolic like type 2 diabetes issue
later on in life so again there's a lot
of Shame around that stuff too as far as
what people have gone through so
shameflammation is really just my term
to explain this phenomenon that's in the
scientific literature that I see out I
see play out in people's lives on a
daily basis he talks about how how
vicious stresses as a cause I guess for
inflammation
you know people tend to think of stress
as being a really really bad thing I
hear often that some kind of stress is a
good stress what is in particular the
type of stress you're talking about that
is leading to
um this this shame inflammation I'm
assuming it's chronic stress yeah a
human species the human species wouldn't
be here without some grit and resilience
and I think in some ways you could argue
that were really lacking the resilience
and grit and that's something that I'm
teaching my patients and in the book for
people to sort of gain a resilience to
handle stress there's nothing wrong
inherently with stress and even if you
look at the research around hormetic
effects or hormesis like people are
doing the cold plunges you see all
around the wellness space or sauna
therapy or high intensity interval
training or even things like fasting
these are all hormetic effects that
humans would have spent times in like
difficult times periodic times of stress
that actually makes ourselves more
resilient and and our souls more
resilient in many ways but it's the
chronic stress where it's out of
alignment with
that ancestral Health perspective it's
it's it's there's a that evolutionary
mismatch that I mentioned earlier that
is something that we haven't aligned
with we have these these different
stress adaptation responses in the body
and the body's releasing things like
cortisol and adrenaline and we never
allow this sympathetic fight-or-flight
stressed aspect of our autonomic nervous
system to calm down
so we're always in this fight-or-flight
stressed state to varying degrees that
people never are able to regulate
themselves and never able to support
that parasympathetic that resting
digesting that hormone balance state of
their their nervous system so yeah it
could look different for different
people but the things that I hear the
most with from people it's their jobs
it's it's like a lack of I would say
healthy boundaries with their jobs and
their family can be a source of stressor
finances can be a sort of stress and
their health I think when you don't feel
well that's stressful as well those are
the most common things that I hear from
people this fight or flight response
this sort of prolonged state of feeling
like you're kind of in fight or flight
which is sort of characterized by being
short of breath or feeling a bit on edge
or nervous what is the consequence of
being in that state for too long because
a lot of people can probably relate to
that yeah
well it's that is
impart what's driving these these vast
epidemic of health problems in our world
today when you're talking about 50
million Americans habiting autoimmune
condition hundreds of millions worldwide
are having autoimmune condition type 2
diabetes I mean it's the vast majority
of people in the west are somewhere on
this insulin resistant Spectrum meaning
they have things like PCOS or weight
loss resistance or insatiable Cravings
or pre-diabetes or type 2 diabetes all
of these health problems that we are
plagued with as a world are in part fed
by chronic stress it's just a matter of
how much your body can handle and that's
sort of the conversation in the book
about bio individuality right some
people have the buck analogies sort of
that bucket analogy some people have
massive buckets and they can handle a
lot of things in their life before it's
going to hit that Tipping Point what is
the Tipping Point The Tipping Point is
health problems well something's got to
give and they realize they're diagnosed
with a health problem and it's stressors
the foods we eat trauma all of these
things accumulate you can't change your
bucket size but you can change what you
put in it you can't change your genetic
tolerance for stressors but you can
change what you put in it so it's really
a message of agency right it's a message
of what can I do we all have different
abilities or thresholds to handle things
in our life but we all have the ability
to clear these things out and to heal
ultimately
you know have hearing all of this it
makes me feel so deeply that the way
we've chosen to live our lives is really
unhuman hmm
and when I think about what we can do to
change that from like a real systemic
level it seems
like it might just be too big of a job
because of the direction of travel of
everything technology the way we're
we're organizing our lives in terms of
like cities and work and profession
professionalism and social media etc etc
are you optimistic that there's things
we can do to change it and what are
those like real systemic things we have
to do within our own lives as
individuals but also as a society
yeah I mean it's something I think often
about and I think that there's a growing
amount of pockets of people if you will
that are that know intuitively they have
to do something different to see
something different and being in
functional medicine
for the past 13 plus years at this point
I had to say what was once considered
radical or Fringe so 10 years ago the
idea that stress and Trauma could
trigger autoimmune issues
is now very much talked about in
conventional settings and that things
that may have seen woo-woo and strange
13 years ago now is being researched by
reputable institutions I I talk about
the research of the book around shinran
Yoku which is the Japanese term that
translates as Forest bathing which
sounds weird when you think of it in
English but it's actually a beautiful
description I believe of the Japanese
art of using nature as a meditation
using nature as a medicine and how
researchers show like just spending few
minutes in nature and taking in with all
of your senses like a sensorial effect
of nature lowers inflammation levels
lower stress hormones balances the human
immune system actually improves the
human microbiome because of the the
things you're smelling in and taking in
with all of your senses so I I think the
fact that researchers are looking at the
ancient Arts
is a good sign that we as a culture are
looking for something different because
I think in many ways if you remember
that Pixar film Wally I think Wally's
prophetic in many ways of like the path
we could go down where people are just
sitting looking at a screen and we've
lost all sense of reality that I don't I
think whoever wrote Wally the people at
Pixar we can go a different direction
you know this is such a a an interesting
strange question to US based on what
you've said but I was just just as you
finished speaking then I was thinking
about how we know this stuff like you
know this stuff I know this stuff it's
not the in terms of like getting back to
being a little bit more human in the way
that we organize our lives but we I was
going to ask you the question like do
you do it
yeah I mean to me I don't think you have
to pick between modernity and
decreasing that Chasm between genetics
and epigenetics so I live in a modern
world I run a Telehealth clinic so I use
technology to speak to people around the
world at for the past 13 years and we
ship labs to them and so I very much am
a fan of technology and people are
listening to us right now around the
world I love the decentralization the
democratization of health information
because of Technology it's wonderful but
I think these sort of unfettered lack of
healthy boundaries with this phenomenon
that we only have relatively a few years
of experience with us as a world I think
that that's something we just have to
learn how to check ourselves and we are
all trying to figure it out right now so
do I live it yes I live it but I I live
it in a balanced way where I have
boundaries with technology like my son's
here in the studio with us right now
he's 16 years old he just got a phone at
16 and so as a parent I'm making these
decisions of there's kids that are like
eight nine years old having social media
and we have the U.S Surgeon General
Dr Vivek Murthy
say recently that he says this is the US
government saying children under the age
of 14 shouldn't have social media if the
US government's saying it who takes
well-measured conservative advice for
these type of things when it comes to
Wellness historically if they're
recommending it I could only assume that
we have an issue at hand so yes I I
think it's just a matter of all of us to
make these decisions for ourselves out
of self-respect not out of shame but out
of self-respect what do I need what
healthy margins what healthy boundaries
do I need to live a more sane life to
live a more joyous to live a little a
more meaningful life
some people can handle probably more
technology than me some people could
probably we all have again this bio
individuality when it comes to these
things but I think we just need to
out of self-respect check ourselves it's
I'm thinking even Beyond technology into
things like you know we're becoming more
lonely than ever before but we all know
that's not good for our health or our
happiness we know that being in a
community is great for our health and
happiness we're eating things that we
all know are not great for our health
and happiness as well and and so like
the really and many of the things you've
said I was like you know I know that to
be true but like why don't I do all of
those things and my my conclusion in my
head was that I think I optimize for
something else I think a lot of us
actually optimize Our Lives not for like
health or really even for
what we know at our deepest level would
make us happiest we optimize for other
things like status and success and we're
all reproductive reproductive
um Pursuits and I was just thinking I'm
just trying to mull it over there why
that is why like everything you've said
in terms of being healthy and being
happy
um we all understand and even I think
about myself here I think I could go do
all of those things but what I'd have to
do
is probably log off the internet you
know probably wind things down a little
bit be a little bit less ambitious
um would I be happier
probably
but I'm not doing it I want to be
healthier yeah probably but I'm not
doing it and that's really what I'm
trying to get at it's like why people
don't do what they know they should do
and why they seem to be optimizing for
like success and happiness yeah I think
it's it's our culture's priorities right
it's like burnout is this badge of honor
and like status and how many followers
you have in social media how many
downloads you have is seen as it's
deified it's glorified in many ways and
I think
this unsexy stuff like you know getting
it whatever fascinating or eating well
isn't as alluring because it's people
don't see it all the time so I think
it's human nature I think our culture is
really
um sells us a lot of things as far as
what's important and how we look and
things that are materialistic tend to be
top of the list so I don't think it's
about
it's not just you it's me it's all of us
we all are in this culture that tells us
this is what's important but ultimately
my experiences to be the best you like
to be the best CEO to be the best
successful human being to be the best
partner
we have to have our health and I see a
lot of high performing successful people
that don't want to choose either or
they want to be successful but they
realize they cannot be the highest
performing person if they don't have
their health and I see people start
their health eroding because it is
unsustainable to always be in that
sympathetic fight or flight stress State
and they know intuitively something's
off here I got away with it in my 20s
I'm getting away with it mostly in my
30s but they start to erode and then
when you have your health
look not as sustainable and impenetrable
as you thought it was
then at that point oftentimes it's that
motivation that you just said that
actually motivates them to get healthy
one of the things that orientates us and
changes our priorities is trauma and
that's something you talk about in the
book as well
um the really fascinating thing that
I've always been Keen to ask somebody is
about this idea of intergenerational
trauma which you've referenced a second
ago because I wasn't sure if
intergenerational trauma was just like
woo-woo spiritual stuff or whether it
was real science I.E that the idea that
your parents trauma can be passed on to
you somehow
is that true yeah well and that's yes it
is true it is true it's what research is
really exploring of How It's expressed
in our descendants and then we all have
trauma just in our own life right and we
all
these are things that we can accumulate
and through things like therapy and
somatic experiences and things like EMDR
that I talk about you can work on your
trauma in your life but for some of us
part of our trauma in our life today has
to do with the trauma that our ancestors
have gone through so two
geopolitical historical things that were
big things in our world are really were
explored in the scientific literature to
see how this plays out one was a
Ukrainian genocide man-made famine
in the early 20th century Joseph Stalin
the Ukrainian people wanted to have
freedom really nothing new is Under the
Sun every time the Ukrainian people
wanted to have freedom there was some
sort of authoritarian squash on their
efforts but this famine in the early
1900s was done in the Ukrainian people
millions of people died and what
researchers have found is not just the
people that went through this atrocity
their their children and their great
grandchildren had the same methylation
gene variants methylation is something
that we quantify on Labs it's a
interconnected different biochemical
Pathways that impact inflammation levels
impact neurotransmitters and how our
brain works different detoxification
Pathways that literally this trauma that
the people went through during this
Ukrainian genocide
was passed on like an epigenetic
heirloom of how genes were expressed by
their experience similar research was
done in the Holocaust and the
descendants of people that went through
the Holocaust in Germany and Poland so
yes it's sound science fiction but
intergenerational trauma or
transgenerational trauma looking at how
trauma is literally stored in the cells
and then passed on through Family Lines
is very much science and it's shown that
these people have increased likelihood
of mental health issues autoimmune
issues type 2 diabetes different
hormonal problems and I you know this is
what's being explored in science but I
could only imagine that it exists on a
spectrum that maybe all of our
descendants haven't gone through the
same things but I think intuitively
again we can know that there's certain
behaviors in certain ways that people
live in part because of what our
ancestors have gone through so yeah
that's what's being explored it feels a
bit like a it feels a lot to deal with
like having to deal with my own trauma
let alone my great-grandparents trauma
as well having a role in my my life and
and then in that way I think
that can make a lot of people can think
about this it's like wow I'm screwed
like I If it wasn't I have my own junk
let alone
my ancestors though and I'm gonna pass
my junk on to my kids right but I think
so for the average person you don't
necessarily to even have to think about
it because it's just where you're at
today
and but I would say this
if you shift your perspective
and almost give yourself a little bit
more grace
a little bit more forgiveness and
compassion to say wow there are some big
things at play here and I see people
up against seemingly insurmountable
things that have gone through a lot of
personal trauma trauma as well as
ancestral trauma break the chains of
dysfunction break the change of disease
and disorder in their life and heal not
only themselves
but heal their families heal their
children's children heal Generations
they'll never get to see so I think it's
how you look at it yes it's heavy but as
trauma can be inherited so can healing
interesting
the the in that chapter where you talk
about intergenerational trauma you also
talk about um polyvaginal Theory big
word yeah phrase yeah what is what is
polyvaginal theory poly vagalog of
course I've got vaginal Jesus Christ
we'll keep that in is there anything
called poly vaginal probably I have to
we have to learn about that together I
don't know let's talk about polyvagal
Theory instead then if you don't know
anything about polyvaginal
that'll be the next episode The after
dark episode
uh poly Bagel theory is well it gets its
name in part because of the vagus nerve
it's the largest cranial nerve in the
body right and it's
it translates from the word wandering or
Wanderer and it sort of wanders from the
brain down into the gut and it's the
main nerve that's responsible for a
parasympathetic uh arresting digesting
or Zend out hormone balanced state of
which that aspect of our autonomic
nervous system is weakened or what
researchers call a we many of us have a
poor vagal tone our vagus nerve is weak
our parasympathetic is weak because our
sympathetic that fight or flight
stressed super productive always on the
go
type A is very strong it's really
overactive so the sympathetic nervous
system is is where the the fight or
flight the stress responses happen and
then the the parasympathetic nervous
system is ultimately what calms us down
yes exactly and both are important okay
both are important it's about but many
of us have a disregulated nervous system
response because of this sort of
imbalance within the autonomic nervous
system and then the enteric nervous
system is sort of the third aspect of
our autonomic nervous system but
polyvagal theory is a way to understand
how trauma can be stored in our body so
there's three main
in this sort of study of the human
nervous system there's the dorsal vagal
sympathetic the ventral vagal it's
understanding how upon this Continuum
can the human nervous system reside so
can we be in this sort of I am in the
state of calm and protected and I'm
grounded and and I'm in Balance all the
way to sympathetic fight or flight all
the way to I am
under threat I am shutting down I'm in
hyper vigilance and the end stage of
that is something called dysautonomy or
dysautonomia it is when the nervous
system is perpetually stuck in that
fight or flight state which is that's a
diagnosable disorder but again polyvagol
attempts to describe how these things
exist on a spectrum
to understand how things like thoughts
and emotions
trauma shame our bodies are like
cellular libraries where we're storing
all of these things and the thoughts we
speak the thoughts we're thinking the
words we speak are literally stored in
ourselves and we have trillions of cells
that are listening intently to how we
speak and how we how we live our life so
that's what polyvagal theory is talking
about so in essence those these three
states where you're relaxed in state one
state two you have sort of acute stress
small amounts of stress and then in
state three you have severe things like
burnout and you know
physiological collapse I guess yeah
um
and what what sort of proportion of the
population do you think are living in
each state there
yeah I mean I would assume when you look
at the statistics of chronic disease and
the fact that you're talking depending
on the study that you look at 60 to 80
percent of the West U.S UK all Western
countries are somewhere are dealing with
some massive metabolic issues which is
very much stress related food plays a
part of it because unhealthy foods that
don't love us back is also stressful but
also the mental emotional spiritual
stress of it when you look at the ins
the phenomenon of insulin resistance of
what is which is the leading cause of
heart disease in the world and doubles
the risk of many cancers as well that
phenomenon of metabolic issues and
hyperinsulinemia or excess insulin and
glucose issues
it's the vast majority of people so the
vast you really can't have a regulated
nervous system
when you're looking at that so I would
venture to say that between stage two
and three between the sympathetic to all
that that system hyper vigilance it's
the vast majority of the human race
right now I always think about you know
there's I have stress in my life and um
I worry that at some point ongoing
stress will put me into that state of
hyper vigilance in my understanding of
hyper vigilance is basically where we're
really regardless of stimuli or
environment you just can't shake the
feeling of stress some people like you
know they're just kind of stressed on
edge anxious at all times I've always
thought that that state is reached after
a prolonged period maybe in state two
um is that accurate is that kind of how
how it works where you're it you're in
sort of chronic stress for too long that
you fall into this category of hyper
vigilance where you're basically just
anxious forever yeah I think in most of
the cases it's cumulative like that it
takes time I mentioned that that sort of
General statistic of most people that
have metabolic issues most people that
have an autoimmune issue these sort of
end like more diagnosable things right
it's about four to ten years prior that
things are Brewing so yes I think for
most people like it's it's like that but
then you have the sort of the outlier
that I think that goes to just such
intense trauma that's such intense
lost in the life that things could
happen speed up if you will speed up
that degradation of how the nervous
system and immune system is regulating
itself
and you mentioned food a second ago in
the role that plays the foods that don't
love us back what are the foods that
don't love us back
I'm gonna lose some friends right now on
this podcast but it's that what I would
call the inflammatory core four
plus one if I can but the would be
gluten containing grains would be on the
list that's things like wheat and rye
and barley and spelled and it's a
nuanced conversation about this is it is
it really the grain or is it what we've
done to the grain I think it's more of
what we've done to it we're not properly
preparing it plus we're hybridizing it
we're spraying it with tons of stuff and
then we're over consuming it right we're
over consuming a famine food we're
feasting on a famine food that
historically was stored well and now
we're always consuming it let alone what
we've done to the crop and the soil in
which it's grown but for the sake of
Simplicity I think the average sort of
wheat that people are consuming is
triggering a lot of inflammation levels
definitely doesn't love the human
species back very much and number two
would be industrial seed oils
things like Cardinal canola oil
vegetable oil soybean oil these things
that are not I mean this is kind of
controversial for me to say in the
health space I don't think that they are
inherently bad I think they are just
over consumed because the we need
healthy ratios of omegas three six and
nine when you think of Omega-3s it's
like the healthy fish right people or
like the the mega the healthy long chain
Omega fats you get predominantly from
fish people are not having enough of
those healthy Omega-3s having a lot of
these seed oils that are in a lot of
packaged Foods so I think it's just the
over consumption of one and not eating
enough of the other the third would be
conventional Dairy
by conventional I mean there's the
average Dairy that you're getting the
milk that you're getting at the grocery
store there are better versions of it
when you're looking at
grass-fed organic a tube milk you'll see
popping up because beta A2 casein is the
subtype of casein that would have been
consumed by humans for thousands of
years now because of the cross-breeding
of cows most casein is beta A1 casein
which has been shown to be more
inflammatory because again of this
evolutionary mismatch our ancestors
wouldn't have consumed all of this the
fermentation of dairy can make it more
digestible because it's breaking down
the casein the dairy protein and those
Dairy sugars so things like kefirs or
cheeses and yogurts can be avoided more
digestible and the fourth would be sugar
and the over consumption of that but
most people know that but I would be
more mindful of even the nice sounding
euphemisms for sugar you know where it's
like oh it sounds like a agave nectar I
think of that right Agave just sounds so
natural like they're squeezing the agave
in the cup and just consuming it it's
mostly marketing because it's still
sugar and it's still high in fructose so
I would be just mindful for The Listener
out there to look at the grams of added
sugar you're consuming in a day no
matter where it comes from and then the
plus one would be alcohol which is
really a saboteur to our gut feeling
connection it will impact our gut
microbiome it's been shown to increase
leaky gut syndrome really raise systemic
inflammation and it's a neurotoxin
researchers have shown that even
drinking a small amount a few times a
week is associated with lower brain
volume lower hippocampus size which we
which we need for
focus and energy and and having optimal
cognition
this time gut microbiome is one that
I've only come across in the last couple
of months maybe the last three to four
three to four months roughly and the
importance of the gut microbiome for
anybody who is new to this this term got
microbiome why does it matter and what
is it yeah it's
vastly important and as I mentioned
earlier the gut and brain are formed
from the same fetal tissue right
that's our gastrointestinal system
within it we have upwards depending on
the study that you look at upwards of
100 trillion bacteria in our gut and
it's sort of this gut Garden that
influences a lot of things in our body
as I mentioned about 95 of Serotonin is
made in the gut fifty percent of
dopamine so our happy pleasure
joyous chemicals neurotransmitters are
made in the gut stored in the gut almost
exclusively when you're talking about
serotonin and dopamine and these
bacteria also regulate the immune system
so we're talking about the way that
two-thirds of the immune system is
living in the gut or an inflammation
they mentioned so ubiquitous most of
it's derivative it's originating in the
gut so there's a lot of gut-centric
components both from a gastrointestinal
system and nervous system standpoint but
part of that crosstalk between the gut
and the brain and the nervous system
and the immune system has to do with the
microbiome which is the collective term
for all the bacteria and yeast and
parasites living in the human gut which
we co-evolved with and in some ways
it kind of made us it kind of we would
not be here without the microbiome if
the microbiome all of a sudden left we
would not be able to produce
neurotransmitters we would not be able
to have an immune system we would not be
able to digest food we would not be able
to convert hormones 20 of the thyroid
hormone is converted in the gut in the
presence of healthy bacteria so the
point is we are it is regulating these
bacteria which are not us is regulating
how we think how we feel how we operate
What We crave I mentioned a study in the
book where there's bacterial imbalances
in many people's guts actually causing
them to Crave certain foods because it
wants to eat it eats what we eat so
again this message of really I think
Grace in many ways where it's not your
lack of willpower sometimes it's just
these gut bacteria that need to be
tended to impruned so we can actually
have proper signaling as far as our
blood sugar control and craving control
so if you care about Mental Health
if you care about your overall health as
far as inflammation is concerned if you
care about your weight and your energy
levels you have to care about the
microbiome because if it's not healthy
you're not healthy how do I go about
caring about my gut microbiome
so it starts with the foods you eat yeah
so I would say that there's that
inflammatory four plus one decreasing
those and then focusing on foods that
love us back I one of the action items
that I talk about in the book is those
soups and stews that I mentioned it's it
comes from a gap what's called a gaps
protocol it's an acronym it stands for
gut in Psychology syndrome or gut and
Physiology syndrome so it's a food
tool that we use within functional
medicine or at least I do that's really
helpful for calming a lot of gut-centric
inflammation and it's sort of a
proverbial Siesta for your gut because
it's almost pre-digesting the foods when
you're cooking things again our
ancestors would have known all of this
because they would have if you talk
about just ancestrally soups and stews
were a thing that people did especially
when you're going through a health
problem when you think of chicken soup
and someone's sick it wasn't the noodles
that were the health benefits of of the
soup it was these broths and these
cooked vegetables and cooked meats that
were easy to digest and break down
so somebody that's going through a
digestive problem gut health problem or
has inflammation levels and suspects
this gut-centric components to that
inflammation or they're going through
things like anxiety and depression or
fatigue I really would Implement I mean
put a lot of recipes in the book so
people can really learn how to cook this
way that's really quite easy and it's an
affordable way to do it and you can
batch cook it and really have it
throughout the week as well so that's
one thing
um and then like these feeling action
items breath work
huge for bagel Tony huge for microbiome
health is it's simple meditation simple
breath work all the way just like
holotropic and more of the advanced
tools that I talk about is a really way
to support vehicle tone the more you're
supporting your vagal tone the more
you're supporting your gut brain access
the connection between the two which is
innervating the gut there's something
called the migrating Motor complex or
the MMC which is your gut kind of
keeping the bacteria in this large
intestine in the colon but your brain
has to be the one that's regulating this
bi-directional relationship between your
gut and the brain and the brain in the
gut so breath work and meditation
I mentioned the forest bathing hyuga
like thing acts of Stillness is what I
call it in the book pick which one you
want but stay consistent with it because
these supporters of the parasympathetic
these acts of Stillness are hugely
restorative to your vagus nerve and in
turn your microbiome if someone's in a
supermarket or on their way to a
supermarket today and they've heard your
your first comment there about the
importance of food and the foods we pick
about the broths and the the stews Etc
as they're walking through those
Supermarket aisles what things should
they be picking up if they are trying to
be good to their gut
well I would start with fiber rich
vegetables because you're going to be
cooking those in the soups
so you really could pick any of your
favorite vegetables that you would want
to be having and then your favorite
protein that you'd be having you could
do chicken grass-fed beef you could do
fish really or a plant-based protein and
you could do the what stock you want to
be having you could do the bone broth
you could do a plant-based broth like a
glengle or Ginger broth or seaweed broth
and just of your choice really curating
these soups and stews and think of it
again as sort of this nourishing
grounding healing time for you and your
gut that's what I would do so wherever
that's at in the supermarket go find
those things and then I would say
fermented foods can be something that
people could consider starting off low
and slow because they can't they are
kind of potent things but things like
sauerkraut and kimchi's and kefirs those
can be good too for many people
as you might know the show's now
sponsored by Airbnb I can't count how
many times airbnbs have saved me when
I'm traveling around the world whether
it's you know recently when I went to
the Jungle in Bali or whether it's when
I'm staying here in the UK or going to
business in America but I can also think
of so many times where I've stayed in a
host's place on Airbnb and I've been sat
there wondering could my place be an
Airbnb as well and if it could be how
much could I earn it turns out you could
be sitting on an Airbnb gold mine
without even knowing about it maybe you
have a spare room in your house that
friends stay from time to time you could
Airbnb that space and make a significant
amount of money instead of letting it
stay empty that in-law that guest house
that Annex where your parents sometimes
stay you could Airbnb that and make some
extra income for yourself whether you
could just use some extra money to cover
some bills or for something a little bit
more fun your home might be worth a
little bit more than you think and you
can find out the answer to that question
by going to airbnb.co.uk host
you were vegan for 10 years weren't you
mm-hmm
why are you not vegan anymore you did
your research on me yeah I was a vegan
for for a while
um it didn't love me back it worked for
a while and I think that's that's
and my first book was called keto Terry
and it really was that
exploration of being that Health nerd
and trying something new and feeling
great and doing it in a whole food based
way and then evolving from it and
realizing it didn't love me back and
just because something's better
meaning just because something's better
than the standard Western diet which it
certainly was doesn't necessarily mean
it's optimal and it's okay to Pivot it's
okay to evolve so for me I talk about it
in ketotarian but it's I wasn't getting
the complete protein that I needed and a
lot of the proteins that I was getting
really wasn't working for me on a
digestive standpoint it just was like a
lot to digest it was kind of irritating
my system and there were some nutrient
deficiencies from a bioavailable iron
standpoint bioavailable B vitamins like
folate and b12 standpoint and true
vitamin A retinol which you cannot get
in plant-based form now in theory I
could have supplemented with all of
those things I could have supplemented
with iron I could have supplemented with
B12 which I was and I could have
supplemented with vitamin A which I was
but this they're synthetic mainly the
the retinol that you're getting from
supplement form is synthetic it's not in
its Whole Food form so the question that
I posed to myself self was
if I have to supplement
is it really the most ideal diet for me
so I have many patients that are vegan
for various reasons like religious and
ethical reasons and we want to make them
the best vegan or vegetarian if they're
vegetarian
food protocol for them but for me I was
able to Pivot out of that where it could
still be predominantly plant-based but
still be omnivore and feel amazing
so that's that was my journey what were
the physical sort of symptoms that you
experienced that made you awaken to the
idea of pivoting out of being vegan it
was fatigue more than anything it was
fatigue brain fog and digestive problems
more than anything and I thought you
know it was just me and you know I
evolved from it I have a not to get
super sciency on you but I have a double
MTHFR Gene variant which just we all
have different Gene variants right but
this is one of those Gene Snips or
single nucleotide polymorphisms that we
can measure we quantify on Labs we get
raw Gene data from something like in the
different
um genetic tests that people get like
ancestry or 23andMe we can look at their
own genetic bio-individuality my body is
not as good in that way at methylating
meaning that specific MTHFR Gene has a
lot of science behind it basically I'm
not as good at converting folic acid
into folate I'm not that good at
bringing this inflammatory protein down
called homocysteine many people have
this and higher homocysteine levels even
slightly elevated is linked in the
research to increasing the blood-brain
barrier permeability basically
contributing to impart neural
inflammation so people that are going
through things like brain fog or
different inflammatory problems or
fatigue oftentimes homocysteine is
implicated in that so for me to get
those levels optimal bringing in things
like wild caught fish and grass-fed beef
and more soups and stews with like bone
broth based soups and stews like
collagen based things love my body back
tremendously did it fix the physical
symptoms 100 so it and that's the thing
is like it's science and art like not
for all of my patients that are vegan
and vegetarian maybe they're not willing
to Pivot so I want to come let's be
pragmatic and be the best option for you
but for someone that is willing to test
these things out still be predominantly
plant-based but still bring these things
in I think and do wonders if you're
willing to do it a lot of people when
they're thinking about being good to
their body or or good to their gut
they'll have like a
detox
you know like detox juice week or
something yeah
what's your thoughts on on that you know
I think it's a lot of
probably
well first of all it's such an ambiguous
term right it's like you don't know what
they're actually talking about when
people say that or it's mentioned on a
bottle or a protocol that you saw online
seven day juice detox yeah yeah so I
I get why people want to do it because
we live in quite a toxic world and eat a
lot of foods that don't love us back so
people are looking for some reprieve but
I find in many ways it's sort of like
Diet culture has knocked its way into
Wellness in that way where it's like
it's this yo-yo dieting of the 90s is
now in the form of like juice detoxes
where you sort of drink and eat like
crap and you go and do a juice detox to
me it's not what Wellness is really
about I want people to have tools
whenever they do fall off the wagon so
to speak I don't even like that term but
you know what I mean when they're up
against maybe a stressful time in their
life or kind of have been busy and
haven't been eating the best and they
want to kind of find their Center again
I think that's great I think the juice
cleanses juice detoxes probably aren't
the way to go I would say again better
than the standard American diet maybe
but not necessarily optimal and my point
would be in thinking about this is the
lack of fiber I think if somebody wants
to eat Whole Foods and maybe get
smoothies because the fiber has been
Blended up in sort of this fruit based
vegetable based smoothie I think that
has its place because the fiber will
buffer all the fructose that's in there
the fruit sugars if somebody's having
copious amounts of fructose
for seven days with no fiber
I don't feel like that's setting them up
for Success where do you go from there I
think after the seven days would be my
mind and if they have a game plan long
term because look a lot of people have
unhealthy guts we know that so sometimes
giving your a break from all the junk in
any form can be good so it's not
necessarily the juice that's the most
healthy thing in the world it's that
you're not feeding it junk for seven
days so your gut's like I'll take it
I'll take the juice over whatever the
beer your son your son is sat in the
studio as you said
um he sat over in the corner over there
16 years old based on everything you
know about
the gut about food about our emotions
about stress and the sort of causal
relationship all of these things have
with each other
um if you could design your son's life
to be optimal as it relates to health
can you talk me through the the
I was going to say adjustments but how
you would design that life for him to
have an optimal life in 2023 and Beyond
yeah so for me like
if we're talking specifically my son it
I look at him now at 16 years old and I
think all of us as parents like whoever
the parents listening to this right now
it's
plant seeds by first living it out
yourself right and
living your life out of as an example
instead of sort of preaching and being
dogmatic and being making it about sort
of diet diet culture I don't think that
that's healthy at all but it really
shifts your perspective away from
all the things you quote unquote can't
have but really focus yourself
back to all the things you get to have
and avoiding things that don't love you
back isn't restrictive it's self-respect
for your body
and really that's something that I've
tried to do with my son and his sister
is really focusing on foods that love
and back so if you want a day in the
life of what it would look like
um he it's funny to see at 16 years old
he starts to own it for himself it's not
this thing that I'm just talking about
or a thing that that Dad does now I see
him he actually said to me this the
other day he said that like it he said
that very thing he he's now taking it
for himself I took it he said I took it
for granted for all these years of just
it was just in the house and this is
what his dad was doing but now this is
like now he can own it for himself so I
think there's hope for us because he be
the first one to tell you he's a picky
eater and that's okay and it's really
just meeting your kid where where
they're at and planting seeds and then
at some point the goal is for them to
own it for themselves so in the morning
I mean he typically does some
intermittent fasting in the morning
which isn't for everybody but 16 years
old he's working out he's eating clean
he does sometimes compressed feeding in
the morning so that's something that's
not for everybody but
it works for him and I we both do it why
why is it good because it's a goal to
support metabolic flexibility humans
would have done this
they just would have called it life
because of food
availability food wasn't always
available for our ancestors and again
most of our genes haven't changed in 10
000 years so to having some intentional
time where you're not eating and you're
breaking your fast a little bit later in
the day or you're ending your eating
window in mid-afternoon those are two
ways that you can do it be sensible
about it be moderate about it if you
have you know an eating disorder I
wouldn't recommend it but
for the average person that's looking to
optimize their health most of us are in
the west stuck in the sugar burning
metabolically inflexible state where
we're we're on this blood sugar roller
coaster we have these insatiable
Cravings even if it's for the healthier
sugars and intermittent fasting is a way
to sort of train your metabolism to be
more resilient to be more flexible
so then you break the faster on lunch
time is how we typically would do it but
we have lots of vegetables and clean
protein and healthy fats like avocados
and extra virgin olive oil and you can
have that whole food smoothie with
fruits and greens and you know some sort
of protein powder if you want to do that
and it's similar for dinner and then
there's lots of things people can have
but also cultivating these feeling
practices to be supportive of the
parasympathetic for speaking about my
son I'm so proud of him because he I'll
walk in his room sometimes and he'll
just be in on the floor meditating and
that's
we also be doing that it's completely
free it's accessible none of us are good
at it that's why it's called a practice
and the people that say their that
meditation isn't for them they're
probably the ones that should be doing
it the most because and I'm one of those
people that our brain is always going
that's why we should be flexing that
mindfulness muscle because it's freaking
weak so I don't know those are some
things that I that's impressive I mean
you will continue your son's room and he
sat there meditating yeah more than once
more than one at least that's what you
think he was doing
we're very good at hearing Our Father
coming in quickly
getting the loaded
is that your trick so
he's a man Lotus position he's a down
pat
and what do you struggle with you know
because I always ask this question to to
people that know a lot about about
subject matter because
I always think it's quite disarming to
understand that they're imperfect too
yeah so what do you struggle with as it
relates to these oh man I am I am so
imperfect so I
I am and I'm prone to anxiety I'm prone
to thinking sort of frenetically of just
like all the things I have to do and
um not spending enough
really not that much time at all
focusing in the present moment back to
why I suck at meditation
and that's okay like I'm okay with that
because that's why I need to do it
um and why I need to do it even more
than the average person probably so
that's what I struggle with it's really
being grounded in the present moment my
mind is thinking about all the things I
have to do my team my patients my
whatever the next thing I have to do for
the book or the podcast so
that's my
my goal is to be better in that area
has your work ever moved you to tears
yeah
on a regular basis actually
when you look at
things that people go through it makes
you appreciative of life so much when
you see people that are
doing all the things that are really
trying with all their heart to be
healthy and to get out of a dark place
in their health
lose it all
um and having trouble to find their way
out of it it is just the sacred
responsibility for me to be there for
them but it's also hugely humbling I
think of just
the brevity of Life the fragility the
between
in the line between health and health
problems it doesn't is not lost on me at
all so I tear up pretty quick
consistently in a consult
it's normal for me to to do that because
you're holding space for people that are
going through heavy things and you're
talking to them for hour hour and a half
at a time yeah it's uh if you aren't
you're pretty apathetic I think to this
line of work that I do how do you manage
that yourself and stop that from getting
you down we talked about stress it seems
like a pretty stressful position to be
in yeah it is I think the first thing
that comes to mind is a great support
system right I think we all need that no
matter what line of work that we're in
or no matter who you are so for me
professionally it's my team so I can I
can really almost metabolize that
heaviness with my team I can go and
talk with them about what happened we
can Rift ideas we can kind of get it out
week by
somatically like talking about it and
these sort of mutual experience I think
that we both we all have on the patient
team specifically so that's it and then
these practices the the practices that I
talk about and got feelings of just
grounding practices meditation breath
work getting out in nature these things
are
non-negotiables for me because of again
I talk about my my lack of presence
sometimes am I focused on all the stuff
instead of being
but also my line of work and the
heaviness that comes along with it
what does your future look like in your
own view like what does when you think
about your life and I often think of my
life in terms of like chapters what is
the next chapter in your in your point
of view if you know it at all yeah I I
don't know I think it's just like in
many ways it's like a TBD sort of thing
it's I I've spent my career thus far
really my nose to the ground
doing what I love
staying in my Lane if that makes sense
or just a relentlessly pursuing a
passion that I've had that's really just
been an outpouring so I think of all the
things that I'm doing now talking with
you right now or writing a book or
having a podcast or all this stuff is
really just Ripple effects of that main
focus of just
figuring out complex problems to
people's health issues
so I don't know where that would take me
but I I haven't really and I probably
not the norm when it comes to people
that are professional and doing all the
things because I didn't really think
that much about it other than just being
of service to the person in front of me
or just I mean when I'm in a consult
that's all that's there it's the consult
that's there and I'm focused on it so it
again it's heavy to hold but that's
basically that all that I'm doing
um so I don't know I mean I had kids
pretty young and they're getting of age
now teenagers now so I'm thinking of
like being able to spend
these years of my life
and like
newlyweds you know so on a personal
level I'm kind of excited for that I'm
excited to like
being a parent's heart
running a business is hard so I'm
excited to see them grow up and do the
things that they're passionate about and
then
I know there's a lot more books in me
and
conversations to be had in the podcast
so I'm thinking of just continue to do
what I love to do how do you manage that
when you become increasingly more and
more successful so you know the book
sells really well the next book sells
really well you do podcasts it gets
bigger and bigger everybody wants your
time and attention you've got all these
opportunities flying at you and with
that comes this Insidious uh thing
called stress potentially chronic stress
so how I'm trying to figure out how when
you're successful at something and the
opportunity comes knocking over and over
again you're thinking about you use the
word earlier on boundaries creating a
boundary so you can
balance both the I guess the pursuit of
purpose and the like health and
well-being of yourself
yeah well let me know if you figured
this out because I haven't really I'm
asking you yeah
so for me it's
I'm a work in progress trying to figure
it out but
I'll tell you one thing
that I'm getting better at it's saying
no to things because my mind earlier in
my career I would say yes to everything
because I think oh like it's an
opportunity right or I I'm so blessed to
be asked why would I say no to that and
if I say no they won't ask me again
right all the things and it's like no at
certain point there's only so many hours
in the day
and my team is checking me on that too
like you need to quit saying yes to
everything so for me I think like
letting like know
it's not not personal it's just no for
me right now that goes a long way to
like decreasing my stress levels so I
I'm just getting started on this path of
no but so I'll let you know how it goes
but uh I think that maybe people that
are the successful maybe say yes to a
lot of things and we need to get better
at saying no
we we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest asks a
question for the next guest
hmm
and your question is here
what is the most
controversial idea you believe within
your industry that most people disagree
with
I have a pretty Middle Ground approach
sort of inclusive approach and I can
normally find
I could normally find
um a pragmatic understanding of okay
that's that's the art of Bio
individuality right it's it's yeah but
context matters who are we talking about
and how are they doing it so I could
think of just about anything in Wellness
where it doesn't work for one person but
it does work for another person so I'm
not a hardliner I guess is what you
would say I really seen and that's
really because all I do is talk to
people about their health 10 hours a day
and just seeing a lot of variables out
there and it's really hard to be super
dogmatic when you see a lot of nuance a
lot of variables a lot of gray areas
when it comes to somebody's health so I
don't know what I would say that's so
controversial I think that what we in
functional medicine
talk about
is still
controversial in some pockets of
medicine so we can put that aside I
think most people within health and
wellness would agree with most things
I'd say I say I'm not super dogmatic one
way or the other my job is to find out
what your body loves and what your body
hates and I don't really have a horse in
the race when it comes to specific
ideologies
um but I do feel like functional
medicine gets a lot of
blowback from conventional medicine I
talk about it and gut feelings actually
the sort of
um God complex that I think sometimes
happens with uh
the conventional medicine against
functional medicine and the idea that
you know food is influential
to somebody's health I don't think it's
controversial but I still hear it from
time to time not super common these days
and it's increasing it's over the past
13 years it's happening less and less is
that 13 years ago it was so radical I
would get phone calls at the clinic
saying how dare you say that you could
reverse type 2 diabetes with food how
dare you say that food plays a role in
many people's autoimmune conditions now
I don't get those phone calls anymore
and we have a bigger platform than ever
so I have a feeling that it's just more
normalized now but it's still I think
it's interesting to me the pushback that
some of us get within functional
medicine with with conventional medicine
it's that they will say there were
quacks or woo-woo but look I bring it
back to this point it's ultimately the
United States spends more
on health care then the next 10 top
spending countries combined yet we have
the worst we have the most disease
and the shortest lifespan of all
industrialized nations
so I think that when you look at those
statistics we have to realize we have to
do something different to see something
different and when you look at the
statistics what we do in functional
medicine it speaks for itself we're
getting people healthy we're able to
reduce and eliminate their need for
medications when it's possible and we're
improving the quality of life and I
think it speaks loudly when you talk
about mainstream institutions like the
Cleveland Clinic opening up functional
medicine centers they're not opening it
up millions of dollars of work they're
putting it into these clinics off of
quackery and woo-woo they're doing it
because the statistics in the data speak
for itself so I think you're on the
wrong side of History if you still think
functional medicine is controversial
it's not we're getting people healthy
healthy shouldn't be controversial and I
think it says more about the system
that's calling us controversial
than it does about us getting people
healthy so that's the first thing that
comes to mind is that still we have this
sort of archaic dinosaurs
critiquing people that are getting
people healthy but it'd be it's almost
like the analogy that I use in the book
it's like the
the the the
I I use the analogy of school it's like
you have the failing student judging the
grade a student and I feel like in many
ways that's sort of the the poopooing of
functional medicine from conventional
world it's like oh how dare you
but yet look at the statistics you have
the worst healthcare system in the
industrialized Nation but yet you're
criticizing people that are trying to do
something different to see something
different
Dr Wilco thank you so much thank you my
friend been a pleasure speaking to you
likewise and everybody should go and get
your book because it's incredible got
feelings I don't know
[Music]
quick one as you guys know we're lucky
enough to have blue jeans as a sponsor
and supporter of this podcast for anyone
that doesn't know blue jeans is an
online video conferencing tool that
allows you to have slick fast good
quality online meetings without any of
those glitches that you'd normally find
with other meeting online providers you
know the ones I'm talking about and they
have a new feature called Blue Jeans
basic which I wanted to tell you about
blue jeans basic is essentially a free
version of their top quality video
conferencing and that means that you get
immersive video experiences you get that
super high quality super easy and zero
fuss experience and apart from zero time
limits on meetings and calls it also
comes with High Fidelity audio and video
including Dolby voice they also have
expertise grade security so you can
collaborate with confidence it's so
smooth that it's quite literally changed
the game for myself and my team without
compromising quality at all so if you'd
like to check them out search
bluejeans.com and let me know how you
get on over the last couple of how long
maybe four months I've been changing my
diet shall I say many of you have really
been paying attention to this podcast
will know why I've sat here with some
incredible Health experts and one of the
things that's really come through for me
which has caused a big change in my life
is the need for us to have these
superfoods these green Foods these
vegetables and then a company I love so
much and the company I'm an investor in
and then a company that sponsors this
podcast and I'm on the board of recently
announced a new product which absolutely
spoke to exactly where I was in my life
and that is huel and they announced
Daily Greens Daily Greens is a product
that contains 91 superfoods nutrients
and plant-based ingredients which helps
me meet that dietary requirement with
the convenience that hewell always
offers unfortunately it's only currently
available in the US but I hope
I pray that it'll be with you guys in
the UK too so if you're in the US check
it out it's an incredible product I've
been having it here in La for the last
couple of weeks and it's a game changer
[Music]
foreign